updated testability statements section 8 (#209)
eea-oasis/baseline-standard: core/baseline-core-v1.0-psd01.md

## 8.1 Internal Authoritative Data for BPIs

###### intauthbpidata

Internal authoritative data means that there exists only one authoritative version of the input data in some system of record of a BPI participant, making it the only choice for input into a BPI workstep. Authoritative in this context means that BPI participants involved in a BPI workstep have agreed that the authoritative source is the accurate and reliable truth for that particular type of data.

#### **[O10]** 
Internal authoritative input data to a BPI workstep MAY come from a single source.

> [[D10]](#d10) Testability: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[O10]](#o10) Testability: 
```

Author: included in the update commit to O10

Preconditions:

> * A PBI test system is up and running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A BPI test system is up and running.
```

* There is a given set of test BPI Subjects that are part of a test workgroup.
* The test BPI participants in a workgroup have agreed to allow internal authoritative input data to a BPI workstep only from a single, specific data source.
* The test workgroup is associated with only one test workstep.

> * The test workstep accepts only input data from the agreed upon data source for a given data schema, and the input data is transformed in an agreed upon manner to an expected output.

Reviewer: This is two preconditions in one. The first:

> The test workstep accepts only input data from the agreed upon data source for a given data schema

seems to set as a precondition the third passing criterion for this test process. In any event:

```suggestion
* The test workstep accepts only input data from the agreed upon data source for a given data schema
* The test workstep transforms the input data in an agreed upon manner to an expected output.
```

(But I don't think the second requirement is necessary here. The correctness of the transformation according to the agreement between parties is already covered elsewhere in the spec)

Author: Removed 2nd precondition and removed 1st passing criteria. That should do it.

* The agreed-upon input data source is configured with a test data set.
* Another, second input data source is configured with the same test data set as the agreed-upon data source. 

Test Steps:

1. Verify that the input data provided to the BPI test workstep is from the agreed-upon authoritative data source.
2. Verify that the input data complies with the established business logic of the test workstep.
3. Verify that the BPI workstep processes the input data correctly.
4. Switch the input data source, and repeat step 1.
5. Verify that the workstep creates an error, and exits with an appropriate error message.

Test Passing Criteria:

* The first input data is verified to be from the agreed-upon authoritative source.
* The BPI workstep processes the first input data correctly.
* The BPI workstep creates an error, and exits with the expected error message, when the input data comes from the second input data source.

#### **[CR36]>[O10]** 
If the internal authoritative input data to a BPI workstep is single-sourced, that source MUST be authoritative.

[[CR36]>[O10]](#cr36o10) Testability: 

Preconditions:

> * A PBI test system is up and running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A BPI test system is up and running.
```

* There is a given set of test BPI Subjects that are part of a test workgroup.
* The test workgroup is associated with only one test workstep.
* There exists a system of record identified as the single source for the input data.
* A test workstep has been created that requires internal authoritative input data from a single source.
* The BPI Subjects involved in the workstep have agreed that the identified system of record is the authoritative source for the input data.

> * The test workstep accepts only input data from the agreed upon data source for a given data schema, and the input data is transformed in an agreed upon manner to an expected output.

Reviewer: This is two preconditions, and the second is unnecessary for this requirement and redundant with other spec requirements

```suggestion
* The test workstep accepts only input data from the agreed upon data source for a given data schema.
```

* The agreed-upon input data source is configured with a test data set.

Test Steps:

1. Retrieve the input data for the identified BPI workstep from the single source system of record.

> 2. Verify that the retrieved input data matches the expected format and is consistent with the requirements of the test workstep.

Reviewer: This is not part of this requirement, it's covered elsewhere in the spec.

Author: corrected

3. Verify that the single source system of record is the authoritative source for the input data in the test workstep.

Test Passing Criteria:

> * The retrieved input data matches the expected format and is consistent with the requirements of the test workstep.

Reviewer: This is not relevant to this requirement and is covered elsewhere in the spec.

Author: corrected

* The identified single source system of record is confirmed to be the authoritative source for the input data.

## 8.2 External Authoritative Data for BPIs

###### extauthbpidata

External authoritative data means that the input data to a BPI workstep is held in some authoritative 3rd party database, such as government records. Unlike internal authoritative data where there is only one source, external authoritative data input to a BPI workstep may have multiple sources.

#### **[R314]** 
BPI Subjects participating in a workstep MUST agree upon the source and type of the external authoritative data used as input to a BPI workstep.

[[R314]](#r314) Testability: 

Preconditions:

* There is a given set of test BPI Subjects that are part of a test workgroup.
* The test workgroup is associated with only one test workstep.
* There exists an external system identified as the single source for the input data.
* A test workstep has been created that requires external authoritative input data from a single source.

> * The test workstep accepts only input data from the agreed upon data source for a given data schema, and the input data is transformed in an agreed upon manner to an expected output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The test workstep accepts input data only from the agreed upon data source for a given data schema.
```

* The agreed-upon input data source is configured with a test data set.

> * An agreement quorum has been defined and configures in the test BPI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An agreement quorum has been defined and configured in the test BPI.
```

> Test Steps:

Reviewer: There should be at least two tests here - one that demonstrates that nothing happens if you don't get an agreement (i.e. quorum), and another that it works if (and only when) you do.

Author: added two preconditions on configured BPI behavior if a quorum is reached and if it is not reached.

## 8.3 External Non-authoritative, Non-deterministic Data for BPIs

###### extnonauthbpidata

External non-authoritative, non-deterministic data means that there does not exist an authoritative, deterministic source for the data used as input to a BPI workstep. In that case, a normalizing mechanism often referred to as an oracle is needed to account for potential source discrepancies. Entities reporting external non-authoritative, non-deterministic data into a BPI worksteps may also be referred to as oracles.

### 8.3.1 Data Trustworthiness

###### bpidatatrust

External non-authoritative, non-deterministic data for BPIs resides outside of an authoritative source and is subject to manipulation. As such, steps should be taken to remove counterparty manipulation and error risk through mechanisms such as redundancy in data reporting and error checking, either cross-party, or by an appropriately incentivized 3rd party.

#### **[D42]** 
External non-authoritative, non-deterministic BPI input data into a BPI workstep SHOULD be sourced from multiple sources.

[[D42]](#d42) Testability: 

Preconditions:

* A test BPI system is available and functional.

> * At least two independent sources of external non-authoritative, non-deterministic are available that produce the same input data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* At least two independent sources of external non-authoritative, non-deterministic data are available that produce the same input data.
```

* A test workstep has been created that requires external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data.

Test Steps:

1. Start the test workstep that requires external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data.
2. Source the input data from a single external source and record the source of the data.

> 3. Repeat step 2, but use a different external source for the same input data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Repeat step 2 for each different external source for the same input data.
```

> 4. Repeat step 2, alternating between the external sources used in steps 2 and 3.

Reviewer: How often? (Is this necessary at all?)

Author: step 4 is not necessary and I corrected step 3 to "for each available  external source ..."

Test Passing Criteria:

* The test workstep should process input data from all sources used in steps 2-4 without errors or inconsistencies.
* The expected results from the test workstep should match the actual results produced in step 5.

#### **[R315]** 
External non-authoritative, non-deterministic BPI input data into a BPI workstep MUST be validated by one or more authoritative entities.

[[R315]](#r315) Testability: 

Preconditions:

* A test BPI system is available and functional.
* A test workstep that takes external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data.
* One or more authoritative entities responsible for validating the input data.
* The validation criteria defined and agreed upon by all BPI subjects involved in the test workstep.

Test Steps:

1. Initialize the test workstep with external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data from one or more data sources.
2. Submit the input data to the authoritative entities responsible for validation.
3. The authoritative entities validate the input data against the predefined validation criteria.

> 4. If the input data passes the validation criteria, proceed to the next step. Otherwise, fail the test.

Reviewer: This should be split up. The first stop is to get to this point, where the input data does not validate according to an authorative entity, and stop.

Then check that is works as expected if everything is right.

Author: corrected

5. Use the validated input data as input to the BPI workstep.
6. Verify that the BPI workstep produces the expected output.

Test Passing Criteria: The test passes if,

* The input data passes the validation criteria defined by the authoritative entities.
* The test workstep produces the expected output using the validated input data.

#### **[R316]** 
BPI workstep participants MUST agree upon a validation method for external non-authoritative,  non-deterministic input data to a BPI workstep.

[[R316]](#r316) Testability: 

Preconditions:

* A test BPI system is available and functional.
* A test workstep that takes external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data.
* There are at least two BPI workstep participants.
* Each participant is a valid BPI Subject and is authorized to participate in the test workstep.
* One or more validation methods for the external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data to the test workstep.

Test Steps:

1. One BPI workstep participants proposes a validation method for the external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data to be used in the test workstep.

> 2. Each BPI workstep participant verifies that the proposed validation method on sample input data produces reliable results.

Reviewer: This isn't required by R316.

Author: agreed. removed.

[[R317]](#r317) Testability: 

Preconditions:

* A test BPI system is available and functional.
* At least one source of external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data.
* A test workstep that takes external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data.
* The test workstep participant has access to the external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data.
* The validation criteria for the external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data has been agreed upon and documented by the BPI workstep participants.
* The validation criteria for the external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data has been implemented in the test workstep.

Test Steps:

1. Input data from an external non-authoritative, non-deterministic source.
2. Validate the external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data against the agreed-upon validation criteria in the test workstep.
3. Record the validation result along with the validation criteria and input data.

> 

Reviewer: Need a fourth step where another participant validates the recorded result using the validation criteria.

Author: added including test passing cirteria

[[CR36]>[O10]](#cr36o10) Testability: 

Preconditions:

* A BPI test system is up and running.
* There is a given set of test BPI Subjects that are part of a test workgroup.
* The test workgroup is associated with only one test workstep.
* There exists a system of record identified as the single source for the input data.
* A test workstep has been created that requires internal authoritative input data from a single source.
* The BPI Subjects involved in the workstep have agreed that the identified system of record is the authoritative source for the input data.
* The test workstep accepts only input data from the agreed-upon data source for a given data schema.
* The agreed-upon input data source is configured with a test data set.

Test Steps:

1. Retrieve the input data for the identified BPI workstep from the single source system of record.
2. Verify that the single source system of record is the authoritative source for the input data in the test workstep.

Test Passing Criteria:

* The identified single source system of record is confirmed to be the authoritative source for the input data.

## 8.2 External Authoritative Data for BPIs

###### extauthbpidata

> External authoritative data means that the input data to a BPI workstep is held in some authoritative 3rd party database, such as government records. Unlike internal authoritative data where there is only one source, external authoritative data input to a BPI workstep may have multiple sources.

Reviewer: The statement is that Internal data may come from a single source. This does not mean it does - without an explicit prohibition on coming from multiple sources, or a requirement that it comes from a single source (which would IMHO be silly), there is no difference here.

As a side note, restricting the use of the terms "MUST/SHOULD/MAY" to where they hold RFC2119 meanings, within the text of explicit requirements, probably helps to pick up issues like this and fix them.

Author: it should be "...only one version,.,.", not "one source". There may, of course, be multiple versions of the same data yet each from a different source. I will update the wording accordingly. Nice catch! Thank you!

## 8.3 External Non-authoritative, Non-deterministic Data for BPIs

###### extnonauthbpidata

External non-authoritative, non-deterministic data means that there does not exist an authoritative, deterministic source for the data used as input to a BPI workstep. In that case, a normalizing mechanism often referred to as an oracle is needed to account for potential source discrepancies. Entities reporting external non-authoritative, non-deterministic data into a BPI worksteps may also be referred to as oracles.

### 8.3.1 Data Trustworthiness

###### bpidatatrust

External non-authoritative, non-deterministic data for BPIs resides outside of an authoritative source and is subject to manipulation. As such, steps should be taken to remove counterparty manipulation and error risk through mechanisms such as redundancy in data reporting and error checking, either cross-party, or by an appropriately incentivized 3rd party.

#### **[D42]** 
External non-authoritative, non-deterministic BPI input data into a BPI workstep SHOULD be sourced from multiple sources.

> 

Reviewer: given the existence of R316 this requirement seems completely unnecessary. I suggest removing the 22 lines from the spec, as an improvement.

Author: R316 and D42 are not mutually exclusive. R316 is a validation requirement of the data ... from one or more sources. D42 says that in this scenario the same data should be coming from multiple sources for cross-validation purposes. Does that make sense?

Reviewer: It's not that they are exclusive, but they're redundant. If you are validating the data already, do we also want to say that you should have to cross-validate it by getting it from multiple sources?

(It is possible that the answer is "yes we do because we're prepared to make people do extra work for extra security")

Author: > It's not that they are exclusive, but they're redundant. If you are validating the data already, do we also want to say that you should have to cross-validate it by getting it from multiple sources?
> 
> (It is possible that the answer is "yes we do because we're prepared to make people do extra work for extra security")

Yes, that is the idea behind D42. This is to enhance security.

* The validation criteria for the external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data has been implemented in the test workstep.

Test Steps:

1. Input data from an external non-authoritative, non-deterministic source.
2. Validate the external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data against the agreed-upon validation criteria in the test workstep.
3. Record the validation result along with the validation criteria and input data.
4. Retrieve the validation result along with the validation criteria and input data
5. Validate that retrieved validation criteria and input data agree with the original validation criteria and input data and that the agreed-upon validation criteria applied to the inout data matches the retireved validation result.

Test Passing Criteria:

* The validation result is recorded and indicates that the validation criteria for the external non-authoritative, non-deterministic input data has been met.
* The recorded validation criteria and input data are consistent with the agreed-upon validation method for the test workstep.

> * The retrieved validation criteria and input data agree with the original validation criteria and input data and that the agreed-upon validation criteria applied to the inout data matches the retireved validation result. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The retrieved validation criteria and input data agree with the original validation criteria and input data and the agreed-upon validation criteria applied to the input data match the retired validation result. 
```
